Let's now discuss the final challenge we can have in our dataset,
which is the malform distributions.
One thing I have always talked about is that many machine
learning algorithms are based on the fact that our dataset
follows Gaussian distribution.
In practice,
there are many reasons why our dataset may not follow Gaussian
distribution. To check whether a dataset follows a normal distribution
that can be done either visually through visualizations or through a
specific normality test techniques.
A detailed discussion about normality tests,
techniques is outside the scope, but you can think about it as specific
measures that help us understand how close the model look to a normal
distribution, and hence, the word normality.
So if we apply specific techniques on a non‑Gaussian dataset,
we might get misleading results, and hence, a poor
machine learning model performance.
So let's take a brief discussion on how can we fix
the data distribution challenge.
Fixing data distribution is more an art than science and it requires significant
amount of judgment and sometimes domain expert involvement.
We can threshold our dataset to remove long‑tailed values by removing any
identified outliers or apply what's so‑called data transformations and
this is usually when your dataset is hiding it's normal distribution
structures and it requires some mathematical manipulations to make it
match normal distribution. Two common transformation techniques are power
and log transformations.
Sometimes it might feel weird why specific data transformation technique
works fine to shape our dataset to match the normal distribution and it can
just be confusing. If you have the same thoughts, let's demystify the secret.
By understanding how the log transformation works, you will be able to
generalize for other types and you will not need to explain them. A skewed
dataset occurs when we have specific values that are significantly different
from the others.
Remember the sale price we draw from Globomantics earlier. Let's see how
the log transform can make the data range to smaller.
Imagine that we have 100,000 and 100.
The difference between them in the original linear
scale would be the substructure result,
which is 99,900, it's a larger spread range which can cause skewness. However,
let's calculate that difference after taking the log. Here,
I represented the numbers in terms of power of 10 and the result would be 5 ‑ 2,
which is 3.
As you can see,
the logarithmic scale properties significantly penalize large numbers and make them smaller, and hence, removes the skewness.